The the present
generation of Palestinians have never
met an Israeli who is not a settler
[music] or a soldier.
>> After two years of a brutal war in Gaza,
a ceasefire between Hamas and Israel
appears to be holding, but it's hard to
imagine what real and lasting peace
[music] might look like, let alone the
path to get there. So, I wanted to talk
to the Palestinian writer, lawyer, and
human rights activist, Raja Shehadeh.
>> [music]
>> Shehadeh has spent most of his life in
Ramallah West Bank writing about life
under Israeli occupation, about all
that's been [music] lost, and what still
remains. His books defined by precise
description and measured emotion have
won him widespread acclaim.
His writing has also appeared on several
[music] occasions in the New York Times
opinion section.
To read his work is to be exposed to a
thinker with a stubbornly optimistic
view of the conflict, but also a
clear-eyed perspective on what peace
[music] actually requires. Here's my
conversation with Raja Shehadeh.
>> [music]
>> Mr. Shehadeh, thank you for taking the
time to speak with me today.
>> Please call me Raja.
>> [snorts]
>> Raja, thank you. I appreciate it. Just
to start, your your mother and your
father, who was a lawyer, were from
Jaffa, which is now part of Tel
Aviv-Yafo area, but when they lived in
Jaffa, it was part of the British
Mandate Palestine.
Can you tell me about how your family
ended up in Ramallah in the West Bank?
>> In '48, in in April,
the Irgun, the terrorist
organization, started bombing Jaffa.
They bombed the center of Jaffa, and it
was getting dangerous, but they decided
to stay. And then Jewish uh
uh terrorists started bombing the
Manshiya, which is a suburb of Jaffa,
and it became very dangerous and they
had a 3-year-old daughter, and they
decided that they would leave to
Ramallah, where they had a summer house,
because Jaffa in the summer is very
humid and hot. And so they left in 20th
April to to Ramallah, and they were
never able to return.
>> I know in in your work you've written
about the experience of being in
Ramallah and and seeing
the lights off in the distance and uh
you know, they were the lights of
Jaffa.
Um but of course, you've
and you you sort of had a feeling of
longing seeing those lights, and of
course you've
lived in Ramallah your your whole life.
And um
can you tell me about how living in
the occupied territory in the West Bank
has affected your own sense of agency
over your own life?
>> Well, I grew up in Ramallah with
an exile family.
And my grandmother was always yearning
for Jaffa, and my mother was always
yearning for Jaffa, and they were
looking at the horizon and seeing the
lights of Tel Aviv, really, and thinking
that this is Jaffa. And so I learned to
look at the horizons also and think that
I'm looking at Jaffa. Although I never
been to Jaffa, of course, because I was
born after the Nakba,
after '48.
And so I had a sense of
Ramallah was not the real home, it was
just a temporary home, and it was an
exile's
consciousness. The expectation was
always that we would be returning.
>> And you use the term an exile's
consciousness. How would you
characterize that?
>> The ex-
I would characterize it by feel the
feeling that where where you are is not
home, where you are is temporary, and
and it real home is somewhere else,
where you where you come came from. You
don't feel you belong to the place that
you are in.
>> You know, it's it's
striking to me in in reading your works,
um that you often express anger over the
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, um
but at the same time I I I never get a
sense from your work that that
anger consumes you. That that you know,
the anger has kind of um you know,
curdled in into a hate or or is the the
prism through which you view the the
situation
um
in Israel and the occupied territories.
So,
what is your relationship with with
anger? How have you not let it
defined you?
>> I think anger is very negative thing,
and I have been always careful not to
resort to anger. And I feel that there's
hope and there's possibility out, and
and anger is a dead end. Anger is
it imprisons you. And
and I didn't want ever to be angry to
the point of being
immobilized.
And I think I take this after my father.
My father was always active, always
trying to find a solution, a way out.
And I think I have the same attitude. I
always try to find a way out and try
always to look at the other side, the
others. And and try to put myself in
their place and how how would I feel if
I were in their place and try to
understand them. And so that
I I see I see them as as fellow
human beings rather than as
an object.
>> I think it's fair to say that justice
or or the pursuit of justice is is one
of the great themes of your work,
um
and
you know, given that
particularly now
uh
when politics that are that are based in
raw power are are so ascendant um
like what is the role of of a
justice-driven
writer?
>> Well, I think the first thing is to
document and make clear what is the
situation and
avoid the mystification. And I think the
colonization works by mystifying, by
making people lose a sense of who they
are and how did they get to the point
that they got
got to now.
I realize now that the people who are
younger than me and who were born in in
the
let's say '90s
never knew the land as it was before.
Never knew what the hills looked like
before the settlements were built all
over them. Never knew the roads before
they were distorted and became settled
roads and
and full of checkpoints. And so one of
the
objects of my writing has been to
describe the landscape as it was before
that and and to
try and paint a picture of the beauty of
the land before
before it was distorted by the
settlements. And then and then also
they they might not be aware how how we
got into the the situation the legal
situation that we're in now and that is
important to
remove the
mystery and the
and and explain
exactly that it was a slow process
which was deliberate and that is also
part of what my work has been trying to
do.
>> And when you talk about the process,
you're specifically referring to the uh
building of settlements in the West
Bank?
>> Yeah, that's part of it, of course.
That's a big part of it.
>> What are some of the other parts?
>> Well, the other parts are how how
now the the present generation of
Palestinians have never met an Israeli
who is not a settler or a soldier.
And there were times when Israelis came
over to Ramallah and to other places in
West Bank and to to Gaza actually and
and went to restaurants and and had
businesses with the Palestinians and was
interaction on on many levels. And and
now none of this is possible because of
the wall
and apartheid wall and and because of
the checkpoints. And so so many
Palestinians have never been to
Jerusalem from Ramallah which is 15 km
away and never met an Israeli normal
Israeli civilian. And so they have
a distorted picture of how what Israelis
are and likewise Israelis
of the Palestinians.
>> You know, it it connects for me to this
um
sort of illusion that I think is is sort
of
pervasive and it's an illusion of
collective responsibility. The illusion
that you know, uh
all Israelis are in some way responsible
for the actions of Netanyahu's
government or the IDF or the illusion
that all Palestinians are
supporters of Hamas or might be
terrorists.
What might we do with that illusion? Is
it Is that just a a fact of of politics
that you know, individuals are ascribed
responsibility that might not apply?
>> I think that the illusion was very
dangerous because it led to the genocide
in in Gaza. Uh so that the
Israelis became convinced that all
because their leader said all the
Palestinians are responsible for for the
murders that took place in October 7.
And so they went about killing killing
civilians without thinking about it.
Likewise in the West Bank the settlers
are now
I used to be able to speak to the
settlers or to the army in in the West
Bank and and have a conversation with
them and ask them why are they doing
this and so on. And now it's impossible.
Now they they would shoot. And so it's
it's very dangerous this this
illusion. But then of course it's the
leaders who who who
indoctrinate their people or
advise their people that this is the
case. And and that's that's that's the
where the problem comes.
>> So so how how might we break the
illusion?
>> They can start
teaching about the other and teaching
the literature of the other and teaching
that there were times in Palestine when
the Jews and the
Arabs lived together
amicably
and and there were important times. They
could concentrate on these issues rather
than concentrate on the massacres that
took place which were not so frequent
but they did take place. But rather than
concentrate on these concentrate on the
brightest spots. But that that
that means that the state would have to
be
pursuing peaceful resolution. That's not
the case now.
>> Yeah you know it's interesting. I think
people can often
conceive of of the conflict as being
thousands of years old when
the reality is it's a little over a
hundred years old and there's a long
history of what you just described of a
different kind of living in that region
of the world than
than I think is often assumed to be the
case.
>> That's absolutely true. Absolutely true.
Palestine has always been
a place for three religions and the
three religions lived side by side and
enriched life because it's in it's
enriching to have the difference
differences. And now one religion is
trying to dominate and and say it's the
only one that is a lot going to be
allowed in that land, and that's
perverse. That's perverse.
>> Well, uh you know, what you're
describing is um Zionism. Can you just
talk about what your personal experience
is of of Zionism as a political project?
>> Well, Zionism has has made my life
impossible all along, because first of
all they
tried to create a state in in in '48 and
and
forced people in in in in Palestine to
to leave.
And and they didn't allow them to
return. And so that was the beginning of
the problem. The
not allowing the
refugees to return. And then in '67 they
continued with the policy of trying to
build settlements and and and force
actually encourage people to leave. Uh
they have they have even they have
called it negative magnet, that they
would make life so difficult for us in
the West Bank that we would leave. And
so our life has been complicated by the
Zionist aim of emptying Palestine from
Palestinians. And and we have subject to
so many rules and regulations that make
life rather impossible. But people have
persisted on staying and and refused to
leave. And and I think that
it it's been
the most important tactic and strategy
much more important than armed
resistance, because armed resistance is
only
causes more
arms, which Israel has.
>> I think there
there is a lot of debate and um
discussion about the extent to which uh
uh
Zionism and uh
Judaism are are intertwined. And and it
also you know then it ends up getting
into to questions of uh
whether uh criticism of Zionism is de
facto uh anti-Semitic. Um
But I my sense is that
it's not that difficult for you to
separate the political project of
Zionism
from feelings about the Jewish people.
>> Absolutely. I've never had that problem
[clears throat] because I've always felt
that Jews are
just members of a
religion and it has nothing negative
about it and nothing in enmity with me.
But the Zionism which is trying to use
the religion to to promote a certain
political project is an enemy to me.
And and the two are separate in my mind
entirely and and I've no difficulty and
I find it very strange to when people
say that the criticism of Zionism is
anti-Semitic. I understand that it's a
political
device
in order to scare people into not
attacking the Zionism and calling them
anti-Semitic by if they do.
>> You know you you write at length about
your
um friendship with a Jewish Israeli
Henry Abramovitch. Are there aspects of
your friendship with Henry
that
might serve as a model for
larger groups of people in their
political relationships?
>> I had several very good friends amongst
Israelis and and they their friendship
is very important to me. And
Uh,
the important thing is to be clear and
open. And and that I think can be the
basis for a relationship between
Israelis and Palestinians. Openness and
and clarity and and
and
attention to the suffering of the other.
So so I would not accept somebody as a
friend who can doesn't understand that
the
right of return is a right that should
be upheld. Because to deny that the
Palestinians exist is so
>> [clears throat]
>> profound and painful that a friendship
based on a denial of that would not be a
good friendship, would not endure.
>> When have have your friendships with
Jewish Israelis been most severely
tested?
>> Oh, they were. They were. And actually
now with the
genocide it's it's a very big challenge
because
the I I expect the Israeli friend to
speak out and condemn and and and and
be attentive to my
suffering as a Palestinian seeing that
part of my people are being
murdered in all wholesale like in Gaza.
>> What you just described um
connects
uh for me to something you wrote in your
book uh What does Israel fear from
Palestine? In in that book you wrote
about a conversation you had with an
Israeli friend and and you wrote and
I'll just read it to you.
Um
Every time I mentioned an atrocity
committed against Palestinian civilians
by the Israeli army in Gaza, he brought
up a criminal act committed by Hamas on
October 7th.
Then with a sad voice he assured me that
the Israelis are suffering from trauma
and are grieving.
And
you know it's
it's completely understandable to me
that people have a strong desire
and maybe even a need to to have their
suffering recognized? Um
but is there a way to
to address that need on both sides
without sort of
invoking a kind of you know,
unproductive endless competition
of suffering?
>> Yes, I think that is true because also
the suffering
at the the time of the Holocaust is
always used as as that we have suffered
most and nobody can suffer as much and
and every suffering is is is is a
suffering and it shouldn't be
underestimated, but
to use that as a justification for
causing suffer more suffering to people
is untenable. It's it's wrong. It's it's
immoral. And and that is why when this
friend was starting to tell me that
you know, they're in trauma and and
justifying what is happening in Gaza
because of trauma, I did not accept it.
I thought it was very
disappointing of that friend to tell me
this.
And and but there's a lot of it in in
Israel, I think. And there's this double
consciousness of knowing and not
knowing.
>> Yeah, can you um
tell me a little bit more about what you
see as that double consciousness?
>> Well, they uh
on the one hand they they know
what they're doing in Gaza and on the
other hand they're blocking it and and
pretending not to know.
And and that's how how they can live
with themselves by by blocking the the
knowledge that that is there that they
cannot deny, that it's obvious, that
that the whole world knows about it. And
so it's a double consciousness. It's the
same with the
refugees. They knew about the fact that
they threw out the Palestinians from
their homes and and yet didn't really
know it and didn't really accept it. And
so they blocked it and And that was why
they were able to live in the houses of
the Palestinians who left and and not
feel guilt.
>> You You've um
referred to Israel's actions as being
self-destructive
for for Israel. And I think, you know,
for many who see Israel's actions as as
actually about self- preservation,
uh it might be hard for them to
understand how someone
could interpret those actions as
self-destructive. So, can can you
explain what you see as
Israel's self-destructive tendencies?
>> Well, by by
supporting the settlements and
supporting the illegalities that are
being committed by the settlers, uh the
settlers now are beginning to act as
against Israeli Jews as well.
And and the
right-wing in Israel is trying to
destroy some of the basis for the
good things that Israel had of
democracy, even though it was only for
Jews, but they had some democratic
aspects that are now being destroyed,
such as the High Court. The High Court
played an important role. And And now,
with these changes in the High Court
that the present government is has been
trying to to make,
they're eroding the the power of the
court and they're eroding many other
powers of the state and and and making
it difficult for the
lower classes to to survive because many
are now under
under
need
help with the
even with food. And And the economy is
bad and and there is destruction of many
of the good aspects that Israel had for
the Jewish people
of Israel, the Israelis. And And so,
that is the effect of the policies that
they have been following in the
against the Palestinians that are now
reflecting badly on them.
>> Well, I want to sort of zoom out for a
second
and um
um bring up an idea that
is kind of about larger narratives. You
know, when when you know, we talk about
um
a year like 1948.
Uh
you know, that that's a a year that is
um
sort of subject to
highly uh competitive uh narratives. You
know, to to an Israeli 1948, of course,
is the year of
independence.
To uh a Palestinian 1948 is the year of
the Nakba. Um and is there a
sort of a a narrative
a new narrative that that might be able
to
accommodate
sort of
both sides of the conflict?
>> Well, I think the new narrative would
have a
very important element, which is that
both sides must recognize the
the right of the other for
self-determination.
And if if there is a recognition of
self-determination for the other, then
this is a very important starting point
and a very important
element in the narrative. And once we
accept the right of determination for
the other, then the other question
becomes how do we
exercise that right of
self-determination? And there are many
ways of exercising it in in such a way
that could take into account the
possibility for the two sides to live
together and find a relationship of
living together. And that that is that
is the important element in the
narrative. The other important element
in the narrative is that the world
the countries of the world which
supported Israel in building settlements
and in in making a complicating the
situation have also a role to play and
they have to take seriously that role
and and try to now play a role in in
bringing the two sides together.
>> And and I I I just want to um
stay on the idea of
uh
you know, narratives for for uh for a
minute. Um
the the writer Edward Edward Said
I think uh the way he put it famously
was that um
Palestinians lack the permission to
narrate. Um
is that still the case?
>> I think there has been a
almost a revolutionary change since the
Gaza genocide and the Palestinians now
are able much more able to tell their
story. Uh
I think
Edward was referring to the fact that
they could not speak about the Nakba and
at that time. And now it's possible to
speak about the Nakba and the word Nakba
has become well-known and you don't even
have to explain what Nakba is because
people know about Nakba. And and the
there has been an opening to writers and
to filmmakers and to playwrights to to
create
works of art and and literature and and
be published by
establishment press and and be
distributed by by distributors who who
who in the past refused to distribute
Palestinian literature.
And and so there has been a big change
now in in the world and much more
knowledge about the Palestinians and
much more openness to to listen to the
Palestinians and that is a very
fortunate thing and and it will make
changes that are basic and and
fundamental.
>> And but despite that there have been um
calls
uh from Palestinians and and advocates
of the Palestinian cause to boycott the
New York Times and and other
publications over
because of its coverage of the conflict
in Gaza. But for you, like how how and
why do you decide to engage with the
media?
>> I think that the criticism about the
Times has is right because Times has not
been very forthright in in calling the
genocide genocide and in in in giving
full coverage to the Palestinians.
Although this has changed in in the
recent
weeks and
months. And and so there has been a
change and we should always work for
change rather than
give up because the Times is very
important newspaper and has many
important leaders and so
it's important to keep the line lines
open and to try and bring it into
more sympathy and understanding of the
Palestinians.
This issue is is is an ongoing issue
because it can be changed and then
revert back to
the old old ways. So
that is an
ongoing battle.
>> In um
I think November 2023 you wrote a piece
for the New York Review of Books
um
in which you described having two
plumbers come to your home in in
Ramallah. There's one older
plumber and one younger plumber. And um
you wrote about seeing the younger man
looking at videos of October 7th on his
phone and and smiling about what Hamas
was posting that day.
Um
which I I
I think
the idea of uh
someone feeling pleasure about that day
is is um horrifying to to a lot of
people. Um and so how how did you
understand
sort of expressions of of happiness
about
what happened on October 7th?
>> Well, it was immediately after it
happened. And so, we didn't have much
information except what was being
streamed
live live
of the breaking the barrier.
And
and the idea that the people of Gaza who
had been imprisoned for 15 years were
able to break the barrier was something
that brought great happiness to this
young man. And I understood his
happiness because it was something that
like the breaking out of a jail. And so,
at that point we did not know all the
details of what was happening and and
some of the horrors that were happening.
And and so, I understood his happiness
because of the uh
bravery and and the fact that it was
possible to break through the barrier.
But later on when we when I realized
what was happening and what had happened
and some of the
crimes that they were committed, it was
a different feeling that I had, of
course.
>> And bravery is a word that um
you used
in a way that was interesting to be in a
language of war, language of peace. It
was written in the aftermath of the 2014
Gaza War. And
you know, you you
referred in that book to
uh the bravery of the Hamas fighters who
were standing up to the mighty Israeli
army. How do you How do you reconcile
the bravery that that
you know, you you saw? And I think
bravery is widely understood to be a
positive attribute with
with the the fact of [laughter] Hamas's
um
sort of violent religious extremism and
and um
sort of uh
total lack of regard for human rights
even in in uh
Gaza.
>> I think the fact that
Hamas was
making attempts at
fighting back the Israelis
is a legitimate thing because the
international law allows the occupied
people to fight and and struggle against
the occupation. And they were struggling
against
power that is much much more stronger
than they are. And and yet Hamas of
course also
is not
very responsive to human rights at
times. And that I think is something to
be condemned. So
the
attempt at
making
taking a stand against Israel is is
legitimate, but the the excesses that go
on on with that are not acceptable to
me.
And so for example in in the October 7,
I thought that
they were right to try and break through
the barrier. And
and and they were not right in in to
commit
atrocities against
the civilians.
>> And you know it's it's um
interesting
there's an aspect of this conversation
that I I realize you know I'm
uh
I'm asking you to sort of speak on
behalf of
Palestinians
broadly. Do you find that to be a
difficult position to to be put in? Do
you feel like there are things you
can't or or shouldn't speak to?
>> I've always felt that I'm not
representative of the Palestinians and
I'm too individualistic and too
single-minded to be able to represent
the Palestinians. And I
always refuse to speak as a
representative of the Palestinians. I
speak my mind and speak my feelings and
and opinions and and even if they are
unpopular, I do not
change them. And so
if I'm asked to condemn one side or the
other, I I refuse because I think
condemning is such a useless
thing. I mean, who am I to condemn and
what is the effect of my condemnation?
And so
very often the expectation is
with the Palestinian you have to start
by making sure that the Palestinian
condemns certain things and before we
can go any further. And I think that is
a very unfortunate attitude.
>> But but surely you I mean there's a
your your work is a condemnation of
Israeli conduct, right?
>> Well, it's a yes in a sense it is, but
it's an attempt to explain the Israeli
conduct. And and not stop at condemning
the Israeli conduct, but explain it and
explain explain it with a view of of
getting it changed and and getting us
out of this dilemma and this
conflict that we are in.
>> Are there things that you say um
that uh
you find are controversial among
Palestinians?
>> Well, at this point there are many
Palestinians who are thinking of
in terms of one state, for example. And
I think that I'd like one state, but I'm
not sure that we are ready for one state
and so I prefer that first the ending of
occupation and then we work out how we
want to live together with other side
and it has to be a slow process and
that's not very popular amongst many
Palestinians now.
>> What do you think the end game is for
uh
the Netanyahu government in the West
Bank and and Gaza?
>> I think that if they continue
as they are now fighting wars on so many
fronts and
thinking that only by fighting wars and
by strength can they survive, they will
end up in a in a very bad state and it
will be the end of Zionism and then
perhaps Israel will become a pariah
state and and
and
totally undemocratic and and
and their future will be in in peril.
Because you cannot keep on fighting wars
and think that through fighting wars you
will survive. Also
the attempts that
the assumption that the United States
will continuously support them to the
extent that they are now is is beginning
to be questionable and without support
of the United States
their possibilities for fighting wars
and winning wars is is much less. And so
I think that
Israel is in a in a
going in a very difficult and bad
direction.
>> Do you think Hamas is interested in
a peace
that doesn't leave it in charge
of Gaza?
>> I can't answer
>> [clears throat]
>> about Hamas. I don't know but I think
that Hamas is
of course trying to
stay in in in dominant and and
but how how how it will stay dominant
and on what conditions and under what a
vital
question.
>> And you I've seen you refer to yourself
as an an eternal optimist.
Is there anything that currently gives
you cause for optimism about about
Palestinian statehood
as well as peace between Palestinians
and Israelis?
>> Well my father in 1967
proposed a Palestinian state in the
occupied territories and
and never changed his mind. And for many
years it looked like there is no support
for such a position. And now there is
support all over for the position of
Palestinian state and the recognition of
the Palestinian state and
by 170 countries, I think. That
is giving me a lot of hope for a change.
And the hope it does not come from
governments. The hope comes from people.
And people
are beginning to be attentive to the
suffering of the Palestinians and to the
Palestinian cause. And and they will
eventually make a change in their
governments. But it's long-term thing.
And the same thing happened with South
Africa. Apartheid was
condemned by people
in the world and who worked very hard to
change it and to stop it. The
governments refused and at certain point
the governments changed. The United
States changed overnight and after that
change the apartheid regime fell.
And so
I think there is hope for the
Palestinians and hope that there is
going to be a change in the positive
direction.
>> Raja, I'd like to um
end this conversation with a question
that's a
a little bit
left field
from what we've been talking about up
till now, but um
you're in Edinburgh right now.
>> Yeah.
>> A
a city that you spent some time in and
um I'm sure it's about something that
that you've said about the city,
which is this. You said it's a place
where if you love something
when you come back you find that it is
still there, that it hasn't been
destroyed. That's very comforting for
someone who lives in a place that is
constantly under attack.
Um [snorts]
I I understand how how that would be
comforting.
But I'm wondering if there are also more
complicated feelings that come along
with that sense of comfort, some some
internal dissonance maybe.
>> I think that Edinburgh is a place that
uh a chance to people to flourish and to
be
uh
attentive to arts and beauty and and so
on. Whereas in our country now every
time we uh
love a place, love a hill, love a
landscape, it gets it gets destroyed.
And
and we are not given the chance to
organize our life in a better way and in
a more productive way because we're
constantly struggling to survive.
>> Is there any good Palestinian food in
Edinburgh?
>> I don't look for Palestinian food when
I'm outside.
>> I [laughter] guess you have that enough.
>> I don't know but there is some Lebanese
guy who's doing very well.
>> [laughter]
>> Um thank you very much for speaking with
me today. I appreciate it and I'm
looking forward to talking with you
again in about a week and a half.
>> I look forward to that, too.
Thank you.
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So, a couple weeks later I
checked back in with Raja.
>> [music]
>> We talked about the terms genocide and
apartheid and why he thinks legal action
over Gaza [music] matters.
Raja, how are you today?
>> I'm very well. I'm glad to see you
again.
>> So, you know, something that I was
thinking about coming out of our first
conversation was um
the way you use words like uh apartheid
or genocide. Um and these are are highly
contested terms and
sometimes I I I wonder if the impulse to
debate those terms can risk turning
arguments about the conflict into
arguments about semantics. So, I I
wonder for you
are there any downsides to using terms
like genocide and apartheid or
or maybe the contentiousness is why you
feel you need to use them?
>> You know, I've been following the
Israeli
development of the apartheid regime in
the West Bank for since '79
and the documenting the changes that led
to it. And so, I'm very familiar with
how it came about and I didn't use the
the term apartheid because I didn't want
to alienate the readers and and
do exactly what you're saying,
focus on the
term rather than on the
facts. But, now that it has become very
clear that situation is one of
apartheid, I think it's very important
to use the term. And likewise with
genocide, I didn't use genocide until I
became very clear that the definition of
genocide exactly fits the case in Gaza
and and then I thought it's important to
use the the term because it has
consequences, legal consequences, which
I would like to see take care take take
place.
>> What are some of those legal
consequences?
>> Well,
it's a crime and the
those who perpetrated the crime should
be punished punished. And that's very
important because otherwise
they will repeat the same same actions.
And in a way, because nothing has
happened to Israelis who advocated
genocide in Gaza, they're repeating a
similar tactics in the West Bank or
every day.
And so, it it goes on and on and on. And
what the the only way to stop it is by
taking legal action against them and
it's hasn't happened yet.
>> After October 7th, 2023, the um
the anti-Zionist
Jewish writer Peter Beinart wrote a
piece for the New York Times op-ed
section, the opinion section, where he
argued that when Palestinians resist
their oppression in ethical ways by
calling for boycotts, sanctions, and the
application of international law, the
United States and its allies work to
ensure that those efforts fail, which
convinces many Palestinians that ethical
resistance doesn't work, which empowers
Hamas.
Does that diagnosis ring true for you?
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. And the best
example is the case of sanctioning
Al-Haq. Al-Haq is an organization which
I started about 40 years ago. And and
the United States
Trump's government has sanctioned the
organization and rendered it
difficult to function because it it
cannot have access to its email, it
cannot have
funding, it cannot go on with its normal
activities. And and the videos that
document violations of
Israeli actions from YouTube have been
removed. And so
people will say, "What's the use of
human human rights when when it's this
is the treatment?" And when when people
are have no protection against Israeli
brutality by the army or the settlers,
then they say, "What's the use of being
non-violent when when violence comes
against us?" Then the answer is the only
way to do is to fight like Hamas.
And and that's what the young people
come to to conclude.
>> What would then disempower Hamas?
>> I think if if there is peace and if
there is an attempt at negotiating with
Hamas so that it it is changes its
policies and positions, then then there
is a possibility for for change. But
Israel is bent on destroying Hamas
through force and not through
negotiations and through a peaceful
means. And and that is not going to work
at all.
It will perpetuate more and more
violence.
>> Do you think Hamas uh
could accept negotiations that don't
involve uh
the dissolution of the state of Israel?
>> I think that I can't speak for Hamas,
but I know that in
they proposed something which went along
these lines of accepting the state of
Israel and and Israel did not respond at
all. It said this is not
this is public relations. It's not
didn't take it seriously.
>> And and you you mentioned the sanctions
against Al-Haq, the human rights
organization you co-founded and I want I
want to ask a question about that. So
when when the Secretary of State Marco
Rubio released a statement announcing
the sanctions
the justification he gave was that
Al-Haq has directly engaged in efforts
by the International Criminal Court to
investigate, arrest, detain, or
prosecute Israeli nationals without
Israel's consent.
Um
is that correct?
>> Well,
Al-Haq has been involved in helping the
investigation by the ICC, by the
International
Criminal Court of Israeli crimes and and
that is something that we have been
hoping for all along that it will come
to a point when we can take the case to
the highest court in in in the world.
And and so we
gladly supported the investigation. And
and to be sanctioned because of our
attempt at going into
a court of law is very strange and very
problematic for a country like the
United States which proposes to be a
country for the rule of law and for
human rights.
>> And something that uh
has struck me in talking to you is um
there's sort of a uh
a a calm or a
a lack of stridency in how you make your
arguments and and some of the language
that you use that to me seems um
very different than
the stridency of younger
pro-Palestinian voices and activists. Um
You know, an example of that stridency
might even be something like uh
that has to do with Peter Beinart who I
mentioned earlier who recently he gave a
talk [snorts] at a university in Tel
Aviv and he sort of got a lot of
criticism from people who said you know
you should be boycotting Israeli
institutions and you shouldn't be
engaging with them. And I think that
kind of attitude
is not one that that you share and I'm
just curious to to know if you see kind
of generational differences
in how pro-Palestinian voices express
themselves and the tactics that they
call for.
>> Yes, but I think that even when I was
young I always had
a milestone.
>> All right, so it's you not the
generation. [laughter]
>> And I've always tried to understand
other side because I wanted to
be effective and be effective by
understanding the other side and
speaking to them in a language that they
can understand. And so I've always
been hesitant to use a strident language
and to be extremist in order to win the
other side as well. And that has been my
efforts all along to win the other side
but it has never worked. Never worked.
>> So does the fact it never worked
give you pause about the ultimate
efficacy of your tactics?
>> No, I I think I'm going to continue on
on the same track because I think it is
important to realize that we have two
nations living on one small strip of
land that eventually they have to live
live together. And unless we try and
make the others feel the humanity of
each of us and they and likewise they of
of us and we of them, then we cannot
survive on this small strip of land.
>> And we're we're speaking
right at the end of the year.
Uh
What is your wish for for the new year?
>> I would like the end of the Gaza siege
which has been going on for 18 years.
And I think that if the
siege ends and people are able to visit
Gaza, especially Israelis, and see what
has been done to Gaza, then it might
create a big change and and awaken the
Israeli people to to the crime that
they've committed in Gaza. And that
could be very hopeful. And also, it
gives a chance for the Gazan people to
to live again and to be able to import
the machinery that they need to to
rebuild Gaza which they are not able to
do now. And it will end their suffering
that has been going on for 18 years.
It's too much, too much.
>> [music]
>> And so, this is my hope for the new
year.
And it is not a small thing, it's a big
thing, but it's it's my hope.
>> [music]
>> Roger, thank you for taking all the time
to speak with me and um I hope you have
a happy holidays.
>> Thank you very much.
>> [music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navarro.
>> And I'm David Marchese.
>> And we're the hosts of The Interview, an
audio and video podcast from The New
York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel so
you'll never miss an episode.